Networking Metrics (#38422)
dotnet/docs: docs/fundamentals/networking/telemetry/metrics.md

---
title: Networking Metrics in .NET
description: Learn how to consume .NET networking Metrics.
author: antonfirsov
ms.author: anfirszo
ms.date: 11/14/2023
---

# Networking Metrics in .NET

[Metrics](../../../core/diagnostics/metrics.md) are numerical measurements reported over time. They are typically used to monitor the health of an app and generate alerts.

Starting with .NET 8.0, the `System.Net.Http` and the `System.Net.NameResolution` libraries are instrumented to publish metrics using .NET-s built-in [Metrics API](../../../core/diagnostics/metrics.md). These metrics were designed in cooperation with [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/).

> [!TIP]
> See [System.Net metrics](../../../core/diagnostics/built-in-metrics-system-net.md) for a comprehensive list of all instruments together with their attributes.

> ## Using metrics

Author: I also somewhat dislike the redundancy. Shall we drop this detailed description from here and the ASP.NET Core Metrics docs given that there is a link to the general metrics docs anyways?

> ## Using metrics

Author: I decided to rename this paragraph and make its intro shorter in this tutorial, given it focuses on collection.

Instrumented code can record numeric measurements, but the measurements need to be aggregated, transmitted, and stored to create useful metrics for monitoring. The process of aggregating, transmitting, and storing data is called collection. Measurements can also be associated with key-value pairs called tags or attributes that allow data to be categorized for analysis. For more information, see [Multi-dimensional metrics](../../../core/diagnostics/metrics-instrumentation.md#multi-dimensional-metrics).

### Example app

For the sake of this tutorial, let's create a simple app that sends HTTP requests to various endpoints in parallel.

```dotnetcli
dotnet new console -o HelloBuiltinMetrics
cd ..\HelloBuiltinMetrics
```

Replace the contents of `Program.cs` with the following sample code:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/metrics/Program.cs" id="snippet_1":::

### View metrics with dotnet-counters

[`dotnet-counters`](../../../core/diagnostics/dotnet-counters.md) is a cross-platform performance monitoring tool for ad-hoc health monitoring and first-level performance investigation.

```dotnetcli
dotnet tool install --global dotnet-counters
```

> When running against a .NET 8.0+ process, it will enable the instruments defined by the `--counters` argument and display the measurements, continuosuly refreshing the console with the latest numbers:

Author: Yeah, there is no way to show the EventCounters when monitoring a .NET 8.0 process, see https://github.com/dotnet/diagnostics/issues/3805.

1. The .NET metric APIs record measurements from the example app.
1. The OpenTelemetry library running in the app aggregates the measurements.
1. The Prometheus exporter library makes the aggregated data available via an HTTP metrics endpoint. 'Exporter' is what OpenTelemetry calls the libraries that transmit telemetry to vendor-specific backends.
1. A Prometheus server:

   - Polls the metrics endpoint
   - Reads the data
   - Stores the data in a database for long-term persistence. Prometheus refers to reading and storing data as *scraping* an endpoint.
   - Can run on a different machine

1. The Grafana server:

   - Queries the data stored in Prometheus and displays it on a web-based monitoring dashboard.
   - Can run on a different machine.

#### Configure the example app to use OpenTelemetry's Prometheus exporter

Add a reference to the OpenTelemetry Prometheus exporter to the example app:

```dotnetcli
dotnet add package OpenTelemetry.Exporter.Prometheus.HttpListener --prerelease
```

> [!NOTE]
> This tutorial uses a pre-release build of OpenTelemetry's Prometheus support available at the time of writing.

> Update `Program.cs` with OpenTelemetry configuration:

Reviewer: Should we leave a note that this configuration will differ for ASP.NET Core apps (e.g. no `HttpListener`) and point readers there?

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/metrics/Program.cs" id="snippet_2" highlight="5-8":::

In the preceding code:

- `AddMeter("System.Net.Http", "System.Net.NameResolution")` configures OpenTelemetry to transmit all the metrics collected by the builtin meters `System.Net.Http` and `System.Net.NameResolution`.

> - `AddPrometheusHttpListener` configures OpenTelemetry to:
>   - Expose Prometheus' metrics endpoint on port `9184`
>   - Use the HttpListener.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `AddPrometheusHttpListener` configures OpenTelemetry to expose Prometheus' metrics HTTP endpoint on port `9184`.
```

Nit: I don't think the second bullet here matters

1. On the Graph page of the Prometheus web portal, enter `http` in the expression text box and select `http_client_active_requests`
![http_client_active_requests](~/docs/fundamentals/networking/telemetry/media/prometheus-search.png)
  In the graph tab, Prometheus shows the value of the `http.client.active_requests` Counter that is being emitted by the example app.
  ![Prometheus active requests graph](~/docs/fundamentals/networking/telemetry/media/prometheus-active-requests.png)

#### Show metrics on a Grafana dashboard

1. Follow the [standard instructions](https://prometheus.io/docs/visualization/grafana/#installing) to install Grafana and connect it to a Prometheus data source.

1. Create a Grafana dashboard by clicking the **+** icon on the top toolbar then select **Dashboard**. In the dashboard editor that appears, enter **Open HTTP/1.1 Connections** in **Title** input box and the following query in the PromQL expression field:

```
sum by(http_connection_state) (http_client_open_connections{network_protocol_version="1.1"})
```

![Grafana HTTP/1.1 Connections](~/docs/fundamentals/networking/telemetry/media/grafana-connections.png)

> 1. Click **Apply** to save and view the new dashboard. It display the active vs idle HTTP/1.1 connections in the pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click **Apply** to save and view the new dashboard. It displays the number of active vs idle HTTP/1.1 connections in the pool.
```

## Enrichment

> Enrichment means the addition of custom tags (attributes) to a metric. This is useful if an app wants to add a custom categorization to dashboards or alerts built with metrics. The [`http.client.request.duration`](../../../core/diagnostics/built-in-metrics-system-net.md#instrument-httpclientrequestduration) instrument supports enrichment by registering callbacks with <xref:System.Net.Http.Metrics.HttpMetricsEnrichmentContext>. Note that this is a low-level API and a separate callback registration is needed for each `HttpRequestMessage`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enrichment means the addition of custom tags (attributes) to a metric. This is useful if an app wants to add a custom categorization to dashboards or alerts built with metrics. The [`http.client.request.duration`](../../../core/diagnostics/built-in-metrics-system-net.md#instrument-httpclientrequestduration) instrument supports enrichment by registering callbacks with the <xref:System.Net.Http.Metrics.HttpMetricsEnrichmentContext>. Note that this is a low-level API and a separate callback registration is needed for each `HttpRequestMessage`.
```

```

![Grafana HTTP/1.1 Connections](~/docs/fundamentals/networking/telemetry/media/grafana-connections.png)

1. Click **Apply** to save and view the new dashboard. It displays the number of active vs idle HTTP/1.1 connections in the pool.

## Enrichment

Enrichment means the addition of custom tags (attributes) to a metric. This is useful if an app wants to add a custom categorization to dashboards or alerts built with metrics.
The [`http.client.request.duration`](../../../core/diagnostics/built-in-metrics-system-net.md#instrument-httpclientrequestduration) instrument supports enrichment by registering callbacks with the <xref:System.Net.Http.Metrics.HttpMetricsEnrichmentContext>.
Note that this is a low-level API and a separate callback registration is needed for each `HttpRequestMessage`.

A simple way to do the callback registration at a single place is to implement a custom delegating <xref:System.Net.Http.DelegatingHandler>.
This will allow you to intercept and modify the requests before they are forwarded to the inner handler and sent to the server:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/metrics/Program.cs" id="snippet_Enrichment":::

> In case you are working with [`IHttpClientFactory`](../../../core/extensions/httpclient-factory.md), you can use xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.HttpClientBuilderExtensions.AddHttpMessageHandler%2A to register the `EnrichmentHandler`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case you are working with [`IHttpClientFactory`](../../../core/extensions/httpclient-factory.md), you can use <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.DependencyInjection.HttpClientBuilderExtensions.AddHttpMessageHandler%2A> to register the `EnrichmentHandler`:
```

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/metrics/Program.cs" id="snippet_EnrichmentWithFactory":::

> [!NOTE]
> For performance reasons, the enrichment callback is only invoked when the `http.client.request.duration` instrument is enabled, meaning that something should be collecting the metrics.

> > This can be `dotnet-monitor`, Prometheus exporter, a [`MeterListener`](../../../core/diagnostics/metrics-collection.md#create-a-custom-collection-tool-using-the-net--api) or a `MetricCollector<T>`.

Author: @gewarren @BillWagner for some reason this link doesn't work. Can you please help?

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/diagnostics/metrics-collection#create-a-custom-collection-tool-using-the-net--api

Reviewer 2: It is working in the preview - https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/fundamentals/networking/telemetry/metrics?branch=pr-en-us-38422#enrichment.

Author: Looks like this is a bug in the verifier and we should ignore the error.

When working with [`Microsoft.Extensions.Http`](https://www.nuget.org/packages/microsoft.extensions.http) and [`IHttpClientFactory`](../../../core/extensions/httpclient-factory.md), the default `IHttpClientFactory` implementation will automatically pick the `IMeterFactory` instance registered in the `ServiceCollection` and assign it to the primary handler it creates internally.

> [!NOTE]
> The <xref:System.Diagnostics.Metrics.Meter.Name?displayProperty=nameWithType> is `System.Net.Http` for all metrics emitted by `HttpClientHandler` / `SocketsHttpHandler`.

### Testing metrics

The following example demonstrates how to validate built-in metrics in unit tests using xUnit, `IHttpClientFactory` and `MetricCollector<T>` from the [`Microsoft.Extensions.Diagnostics.Testing`](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.Diagnostics.Testing) NuGet package:

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/metrics/Program.cs" id="snippet_Testing":::

> ## Metrics vs. EventCounters

Author: I forgot to push this paragraph yesterday, @JamesNK @MihaZupan  can you take a look?

Otherwise addressed all feedback.

---

> title: Networking Metrics in .NET

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Networking metrics
```

description: Learn how to consume .NET networking Metrics.
author: antonfirsov
ms.author: anfirszo
ms.date: 11/14/2023
---

> # Networking Metrics in .NET

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Networking metrics in .NET
```

[Metrics](../../../core/diagnostics/metrics.md) are numerical measurements reported over time. They are typically used to monitor the health of an app and generate alerts.

> Starting with .NET 8.0, the `System.Net.Http` and the `System.Net.NameResolution` components are instrumented to publish metrics using .NET's new [Syste.Diagnostics.Metrics API](../../../core/diagnostics/metrics.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting with .NET 8, the `System.Net.Http` and the `System.Net.NameResolution` components are instrumented to publish metrics using .NET's new [System.Diagnostics.Metrics API](../../../core/diagnostics/metrics.md).
```

> These metrics were designed in cooperation with [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) making sure they are consistent with the standard and work well with popular tools like [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These metrics were designed in cooperation with [OpenTelemetry](https://opentelemetry.io/) to make sure they're consistent with the standard and work well with popular tools like [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) and [Grafana](https://grafana.com/).
```

> They are also [multi-dimensional](../../../core/diagnostics/metrics-instrumentation.md#multi-dimensional-metrics), meaning that measurements are associated with key-value pairs called tags (aka. attributes or labels) that allow data to be categorized for analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
They are also [multi-dimensional](../../../core/diagnostics/metrics-instrumentation.md#multi-dimensional-metrics), meaning that measurements are associated with key-value pairs called tags (a.k.a. attributes or labels) that allow data to be categorized for analysis.
```
